Document EKS Dual Load Balancer Setup recommended for non CLB users (#2492)
gitpod-io/website: gitpod/docs/self-hosted/latest/advanced/eks-with-alb-and-nlb.md

---

<script context="module">
  export const prerender = true;
</script>

# Setting up your EKS cluster with dual ALB + NLB load balancers

If you are unable to use an AWS classic load balancer (CLB) (e.g. because you want to use SSL Certificates generated by AWS) you need to set up an Application Load Balancer (ALB) for HTTPS traffic (e.g. when using VS Code in the browser). If you wish to use Desktop IDEs together with Gitpod Self-Hosted, which use SSH for networking, and thus require a Level 4 load balancer, you also need to create a Network Load balancer (NLB) (which is a Level 4 Loadbalncer that can handle ssh traffic). AWS' ALB is a level 7 load balancer and can only handle HTTPS traffic.

This guide shows how to install both an ALB and an NLB into an EKS cluster. It is meant to be used as a supplement to the [Single Cluster Reference Architecture (AWS)](../reference-architecture/single-cluster-ref-arch) which only installs a CLB by default. You will configure your DNS to point ssh traffic to the NLB and HTTPS traffic to the ALB.

> **Note:** This guide assumes that you will be using AWS to manage your SSL certificates.

## Setting up an ALB and NLB

> 0. Because we need to use an internal CA for communication that has to be distributed to the nodes, we need to ensure all nodes have the right configuration in place. There is an [open issue](https://github.com/gitpod-io/gitpod/issues/11005) to fix it, but in the interim ensure that your overridebootstrap command has the below at the end for all node groups in your cluster.yaml definitionused be eksctl:

Reviewer: Opinion: the current website styling doesn't do a great job of highlighting ordered list sections; the rendered HTML ordered list sections don't indicate (to me) that this is part of a series of steps to follow.

<details>
<summary>Docs website ordered list rendering</summary>

<img width="831" alt="Screen Shot 2022-07-28 at 1 06 42 PM" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/172194/181628553-d6777008-d71f-4e14-a9b1-59034876e46b.png">

</details>

I have a minor preference that we use `h2`/`##` headings to break up these sections into steps, especially since we have the right sidebar to make it easier to jump between sections. At present that sidebar only lists the files we want to insert, but we could make more effective use of it by using headings to indicate the different steps.

<details>
<summary>Docs website sections bar</summary>

<img width="238" alt="Screen Shot 2022-07-28 at 1 08 50 PM" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/172194/181628440-e1ca2261-4806-4714-a5ff-bb62763d602c.png">

</details>

This is a stylistic opinion; I defer to your judgement on this.

Author: I like your suggestion around using headings - implemented it :)

  import toml
  from mergedeep import merge
  c = toml.load('/etc/containerd/config.toml')
  merge(c, {'plugins': {'io.containerd.grpc.v1.cri': {'registry': {'config_path': '/etc/containerd/certs.d'}}}})
  with open('/etc/containerd/config.toml', 'w') as f:
  toml.dump(c, f)
  EOF
  service containerd restart
```

</details>

1. Install the AWS [load balancer controller](https://kubernetes-sigs.github.io/aws-load-balancer-controller/v2.4/). The below example assumes you have created the user `aws-load-balancer-controller` with the correct [IAM permissions already](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/aws-load-balancer-controller.html). `--set hostNetwork=true` is required by Calico.

```shell
helm repo add eks https://aws.github.io/eks-charts
helm repo update
helm upgrade aws-load-balancer-controller \
    eks/aws-load-balancer-controller \
    --atomic \
    --cleanup-on-fail \
    --install \
    --reset-values \
    --namespace kube-system \
    --set clusterName=<insert cluster name> \
    --set serviceAccount.create=false \
    --set serviceAccount.name=aws-load-balancer-controller \
    --set hostNetwork=true
```

> 2. [Install Gitpod](../reference-architecture/single-cluster-ref-arch#install-gitpod) after you've created all the required components ([Object Storage](../reference-architecture/single-cluster-ref-arch#object-storage), [OCI Image Registry](../reference-architecture/single-cluster-ref-arch#oci-image-registry), [Database](../reference-architecture/single-cluster-ref-arch#database)) following [the reference architecture guide](../reference-architecture/single-cluster-ref-arch). While configuring your Gitpod installation, make sure to check 'use self signed certificate'. Also, upload the override.yaml [below](eks-with-alb-and-nlb#overrideyaml) as a config patch in the advanced section of the installation config UI to run proxy with a nodeport exposed.

Reviewer: To confirm my understanding, we should first install Gitpod, then create the ALB, then update the Gitpod experimental options in KOTS and re-run the Gitpod installation? If so, does it make more sense to have the example configuration files closer to the steps that use those steps?

Author: No - maybe my writing here was unclear. I switched the ordering of the sentences to clarify. You don't need to first install Gitpod and then create the ALB and then re-run the Gitpod installation. You install Gitpod, then create the ALB afterwards. At least that is what I understood from reading @mrzarquon 's initial gist. Please let me know if this does not make sense! :) 

I've moved the yaml files to the respective steps to make things fit together a bit more as per your suggestion.

Author: One more question regarding the installation - do we need to advise here that a user should check the "use SSH gateway" box in the installation configuration UI?

Author: Fixed this :)

3. Update the `alb-ingress.yaml` (see [below](eks-with-alb-and-nlb#alb-ingressyaml)) with your site-specific options:

```yaml
alb.ingress.kubernetes.io/certificate-arn: arn of your ssl certificate
alb.ingress.kubernetes.io/scheme: internet-facing or internal

> alb.ingress.kubernetes.io/load-balancer-name: gitpod-someth

Reviewer: ```suggestion
alb.ingress.kubernetes.io/load-balancer-name: gitpod-lb
```

---
section: self-hosted/latest
subsection: installation-guides
title: Setting up your EKS cluster with dual ALB + NLB load balancers
---

<script context="module">
  export const prerender = true;
</script>

# Setting up your EKS cluster with dual ALB + NLB load balancers

> If you are unable to use an AWS classic load balancer (CLB) (e.g. because you want to use SSL Certificates generated by AWS) you need to set up an Application Load Balancer (ALB) for HTTPS traffic (e.g. when using VS Code in the browser). If you wish to use Desktop IDEs together with Gitpod Self-Hosted, which use SSH for networking, and thus require a Level 4 load balancer, you also need to create a Network Load balancer (NLB) (which is a Level 4 Loadbalncer that can handle ssh traffic). AWS' ALB is a level 7 load balancer and can only handle HTTPS traffic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are unable to use an AWS classic load balancer (CLB) (e.g. because you want to use SSL Certificates generated by AWS) you need to set up an Application Load Balancer (ALB) for HTTPS traffic (e.g. when using VS Code in the browser). If you wish to use Desktop IDEs together with Gitpod Self-Hosted, which use SSH for networking, and thus require a Level 4 load balancer, you also need to create a Network Load balancer (NLB) (which is a Level 4 load balancer that can handle ssh traffic). AWS' ALB is a level 7 load balancer and can only handle HTTPS traffic.
```

This guide shows how to install both an ALB and an NLB into an EKS cluster. It is meant to be used as a supplement to the [Single Cluster Reference Architecture (AWS)](../reference-architecture/single-cluster-ref-arch) which only installs a CLB by default. You will configure your DNS to point ssh traffic to the NLB and HTTPS traffic to the ALB.

> **Note:** This guide assumes that you will be using AWS to manage your SSL certificates.

## Setting up an ALB and NLB

### 0. Node configuration

> Because we need to use an internal CA for communication that has to be distributed to the nodes, we need to ensure all nodes have the right configuration in place. There is an [open issue](https://github.com/gitpod-io/gitpod/issues/11005) to fix it, but in the interim ensure that your overridebootstrap command has the below at the end for all node groups in your cluster.yaml definitionused be eksctl:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because we need to use an internal CA for communication that has to be distributed to the nodes, we need to ensure all nodes have the right configuration in place. There is an [open issue](https://github.com/gitpod-io/gitpod/issues/11005) to fix it, but in the interim ensure that your overridebootstrap command has the below at the end for all node groups in your cluster.yaml:
```

I don't fully understand the intent here, but I think dropping the text beyond `cluster.yaml` will be sufficient. 👍

Author: The intent was to highlight that this needs to be added to the definition of every node group that is created. I.e. you need to do this more than once. Is that not correct?

Reviewer: Oh, got it - your explanation matches my understanding, thanks for clarifying! 🙏  What do you think of this phrasing? 

```suggestion
Because we need to use an internal CA for communication that has to be distributed to the nodes, we need to ensure all nodes have the right configuration in place. There is an [open issue](https://github.com/gitpod-io/gitpod/issues/11005) to fix it, but in the interim ensure that all of the node groups in your eksctl cluster.yaml  has overridebootstrap command includes the following:
```
